(ON CUE)
From Philharmonic Hall in Lincoln Center,
home of the world's greatest musical
events, the Shell Oil Company brings you the NEW YORK
PHILHARMONIC YOUNG PEOPLE'S CONCERTS
under the musical direction of Leonard
Bernstein.
And here is Mr. Bernstein.
I'm surprised to find you all in
your seats. I'd half expected to turn
around and see everyone doing the Samba,
or something, up and down the aisles.
This Latin-American music is almost
irresistible, when it's good, like the "Batuque"
we just heard, by the Brazilian
composer Fernandez. It has a way of
stirring up the blood, not only our North-
American blood, but people's blood all
over the world. Ever since I can remember
there's always been an international
craze for some kind of Latin-American
dance music, from the old Argentine tango,
which swept the world in my
childhood, all the way through the rhumba,
the samba, the conga, the mambo, the
cha-cha, the merengue, the pachango, right up to
the present excitement over something
called Bossa Nova. What is it
that makes this music from South and
Central America so exciting? Well, there
are two elements that give this music
its special Latin spirit: rhythm and color.
color. The first of these, rhythm,
doesn't mean just the beat, that
insistent, obsessive beat, but the
complicated rhythms that go on over the
beat. For instance, in this Batuque we just
played, you heard a fascinating beat:
which is already pretty
exciting, not only because it keeps
repeating, but because it has
that syncopated accent
I'm sure a lot of you remember what
syncopation means from other
programs we've given; a
syncopation is an accent that falls
where it doesn't belong, or where
it's not expected:
(SING-) one, two, three, four.
And that's exactly what
happens in this Batuque beat
But over that syncopated beat there are
rhythms that are even more syncopated
and complicated. And there are more.
So, between one syncopation and the other, between the beat and the different rhythms over it, it
turns into a pretty hectic boxing match
with unexpected lefts and rights hitting
you where and when you least expect
them. And that, plus the insistent
repetition of the beat, explains why you
want to get up and dance when you hear
this music.
The second element that we find so
attractive in Latin-American music
is all those special
instrumental colors. They're unmistakable.
You're never in doubt about what kind
of music you're listening to the moment
you hear this colorful
little sound: That's a pair of
maracas, and what's a rhumba or a samba
without maracas? The same is
true of that well-known dry sound
you get from hitting two sticks together --
what the Cubans call "claves." And then
there are all kinds of gourds
and rasping sticks
and an endless variety of drums
and bongos that make the music sound
Latin. Now actually I'm not crazy about
that word "Latin" to describe this
kind of music, because it tells only part
of the story. When we speak of "Latin
America" we are of course referring to
the historical fact that these countries
were conquered, settled, and exploited by
invaders from Latin countries: Spain --
or as in the case of Brazil from
Portugal. That's why Spanish and
Portuguese are still the official
languages of our friends to the south of
us:	and those languages are called "Latin"
languages because they developed from
the old language of ancient Rome. But the
Latin-American spirit -- which is our
subject today -- has other ancestors
besides Latin ones, at least as
important;
and they are first of all Indian, --
the original inhabitants of these
countries, and in some cases very strong
civilizations in themselves -- and secondly,
African, a tremendously important
influence, at least as important as it is
in our own country. And it is the mingling
of these different ancestors, influences,
and heritages, which makes the Latin-
American spirit, at least in music.
SKIPPED
The sweet simple primitiveness of the Indian music mixes with the wild, syncopated, throbbing primitiveness of the African music; and both of these, mixed with the fiery flash of Spanish music,and the sentimental sweetness of Portuguese songs, all together make the music we know as Latin-American."
But we mustn't begin to think
that all Latin-American music is only
dance music -- not
by a longshot. Our Latin neighbors have
produced an impressive number of
serious symphonic composers, who have
succeeded in preserving the folk-flavor
of their own countries, while at the same
time expanding their music into what we
think of as universal art -- music
that has not only a nationalistic spirit
but the spirit of all mankind. Certainly
the most admired of all these composers
was the great Brazilian Villa-Lobos, who
died only three years ago, leaving many
beautiful compositions; and we're now
going to hear the most famous one -- the
Bachianas Brasileires No. 5.
Now that's a mouthful of a title; but it's
simple to understand; Bachianas simply
means "pieces like Bach" -- the great German
composer Bach in other words, "Bachian"
pieces; Brasilieres means Brazilians,
naturally. And #5 means that he
wrote almost a dozen different works
using this title, of which this is the
5th; so there you have it, Bachianas Brasilieres
No. 5. Now what is Bach doing
in Brazil? Well, that's just the point of
this piece, and really of all
the pieces Villa-Lobos composed; he wanted
to bring together his native folk-lore
elements with the great European musical
tradition, and unify them in a single
style of his own, as he does in the very
title of this piece.
And it's amazing how well he
succeeded, as you will hear, especially in
the first movement. There are two movements
in this piece,
which by the way is written for a
soprano voice and an orchestra
consisting of nothing but 8 cellos!
Now, in the first movement, which is slow
and tender, he has the soprano sing a long,
melodic line, without words — just the
syllable Ah.
SKIPPED
-- a beautiful non-repeating melody -- do you remember about non-repeating melodic lines from our program on melody last fall? And do you remember that I used a melody from Bach's Italian Concerto to illustrate what I meant by a long, non-repeating line? Well, Villa-Lobos uses it too, -- not that melody, of course, but one of his own, in the Bach style.
And underneath, the 8 cellos accompany the Bachian song like
one huge guitar. Then there's a short
middle part, that does have words, in
Portuguese, about the moon; and then the
singer goes back to the wordless Bachian
melody, only this time, instead of
singing Ah, she hums it.
It makes a haunting, unforgettable
atmosphere. Then comes the second
movement, which is much more Brazilian
than Bachian -- a fast, gay, tongue-
twister that does sound like a native
folk-dance. This difficult and
fascinating work will now be sung for us by
the brilliant Israeli soprano, Netania
Davreth.
Well, so far our music has been
all Brazilian, which seems natural since
Brazil is the largest Latin-American
country; but I don't want to give you the
impression that it's the main source of
Latin American music. Every single Latin American
country, without exception, has
produced fine, serious composers, from
Mexico to the tip of Chile. But perhaps
Mexico and Cuba have been in the lead,
possibly because of their closeness to
our musical centers, or possibly because
they have such great international
cities of their own. Our next
piece of Latin music
comes, strangely enough, from both countries. Since it was
written by the Mexican composer, Revueltas,
but was based on a poem by a
Cuban, named Guillen --
a poem that goes back to African
tribal rituals and is a wierd sort of chant
about killing a deadly snake. But this
strange and terrifying work, which is
called Sensemaya, combines all
the influences we spoke of — African,
Indian, and European. It is the
work of a sophisticated composer, with a
very advanced technique,
treating a theme of savage
primitiveness. And all that savagery and
violence is to be heard in the wild
rhythms and shrieks, and howls of the
orchestra -- but
all done by the knowing hand
of a real artist. It's much more
complicated, more syncopated, more
difficult than either of the pieces we
have heard so far. Revueltas was
a real artist, who died tragically young,
at the age of 40; and to judge by this
short but thrilling piece we are now going to
hear, he might have achieved true
greatness, if he had lived. Here is his
Indian-African-Cuban-Mexican poem for
orchestra,
Sensemaya.
For the second part of our program, we're
going to turn the tables, and salute
Latin America by playing music written
by North-Arnerican composers under the
Latin-American influence. As I said
before, we've always been
enchanted by those Latin colors and
rhythms, and they've crept into our own music,
just as naturally as jazz did. This
is especially true of the music of our
leading American composer, Aaron Copland.
He is an old friend of ours by now,
since as you may remember, we had an
entire program of his music two years
ago, to celebrate his 60th birthday.
This time we are going
to play a delightful short piece by
Copland that isn't heard as often as it
ought to be: it's called Danzon
Cubano, which doesn't mean "Cuban Dance"
but "Cuban Danzon", which is a little
different. A danzon is a special kind
of dance in two clearly separated parts;
the first part is always very elegant,
restrained, and crisp;
it's wonderful to watch Cubans do it
in their dance halls; because whatever
social background they come from,
they look like princes and princesses as
they dance, very straight
and aristocratic, with clean, tiny
movements. Then there comes
a little pause, while the dancers gently apply
their handkerchieves to their moist upper lip,
for all the world like 18th century
courtiers; and then, without any signal, as
if by magic, they begin to dance part two,
which is usually a bit faster and more
exciting. But right to the end they never
lose that royal bearing and control;
and if we can ever go to Havana again, I hope
you'll all get a chance to see a Cuban
Danzon in action. In the meantime, here is
Aaron Copland's symphonic version of the
Danzon Cubano.
Now probably most of the
music we have played so far has not
been very familiar to you; so now we are
going to play something that may be
more familiar — some of the dance
music from "West Side Story." A lot
of my music shows Latin American
influences, but the music of "West Side
Story" is particularly Latin, which is
only natural since the story of this
show is in great part about Puerto
Ricans. We're going to play you four of
the dances from that show, in a special
new symphonic orchestration. Now
two of these dances are straight out-and-
out Latin dance-forms:	the Mambo and the
Cha-cha, which you'll hear first. But the interesting thing
is to hear how Latin-influenced the other
dances are, which are not Mambos, or
anything. For instance, in the jazz piece
called "Cool" there are hints of bongos
and other Latin sounds; even in the Rumble, which is
simply ballet music that tells part of
the story, you'll hear rhythms that will
make you think of Cuba and Mexico. Which
all goes to prove that the word America
means much more than only the United
States; that North America, South America,
and Central America (and the Caribbean area) are, or ought to be,
a solid United hemisphere.
From Carnegie Hall...
another in the New York Philharmonic
Young People's Concerts under the musical
direction of Leonard Bernstein
SKIPPED has been presented by Shell Oil Company... sign of a better future for you. The preceding program was pre-recorded at Carnegie Hall, New York City, and was produced and directed by Roger Englander. This is the last in this season's series of four concerts by the New York Philharmonic.
Today's program was entitled "The Latin American Spirit" and
was made up of music by Fernandez, Revueltas,
Villa Lobos, Copland, and Bernstein.
On this sixth season of
televised concerts of THE YOUNG PEOPLE'S
Series, the concert entitled "Young
Performers" featured four young pianists
in concertos by Mozart and Liszt; the
program "What Is a Melody?" included
music by Wagner, Mozart, Hindemith, and Brahms;
and the concert "The Sound of a Hall"
featured music by Berlioz, Copland,
Vivaldi, Walton, and Tchaikovsky.